<!-- DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE: It is auto-generated by `make update-man` -->

# ttab(1) - open a new terminal tab or window

## SYNOPSIS

Opens a new terminal tab or window, on macOS in either Terminal.app or  
iTerm2.app; on Linux in Gnome Terminal, if available.

    ttab [-w] [-s <settings>] [-t <title>] [-q] [-g|-G] [-d <dir>] [<cmd> ...]

    -w                  Open new tab in new terminal window.
    -s <settings>       Assign a settings set (profile).
    -t <title>          Specify title for new tab.
    -q                  Clear the new tab's screen.
    -g                  Terminal/iTerm only: create in background (don't
                        activate application).
    -G                  Terminal/iTerm: don't activate new tab and create in
                        background.
                        gnome-terminal: don't activate new tab, except with -w.
    -d <dir>            Specify working directory; -d '' disables inheriting
                        the current dir. in Terminal/iTerm.
    -a Terminal | iTerm Open the new tab in the given terminal app on macOS.
    <cmd> ...           Command to execute in the new tab.
    "<cmd> ...; ..."    Multi-command command line (passed as single operand).

Standard options: `--help`, `--man`, `--version`, `--home`

## DESCRIPTION

`ttab` opens a new terminal tab with a variety of options,  
including executing a command in the new tab, assigning a title and working  
directory, and opening the tab in a new window.

Supports Terminal.app and iTerm2.app on macOS, and - with limitations -  
gnome-terminal on Linux.

Note: iTerm2 and gnome-terminal support is currently not covered by the  
automated tests run before every release.

IMPORTANT: On macOS, **Terminal/iTerm2 must be allowed assistive access** in  
order for this  utility to work, which requires one-time authorization with  
administrative privileges. If you get error messages instead of being prompted,  
authorize the application via  
System Preferences > Security & Privacy > Privacy > Accessibility.

The new tab or window inherits the calling shell's working directory by default.  
On macOS, the new tab or window runs a login shell (i.e., loads the user's  
shell profile) and inherits the calling shell's working directory.

When specifying a command to execute in the new tab, quoted parameters are  
handled properly and there's no need to quote the command as a whole,  
provided it is a *single* command.  
Prefix such a single command with `exec` to exit the shell after the command  
terminates. If the tab's settings are configured to close tabs on termination  
of the shell, the tab will close automatically.

To specify *multiple* commands, pass them as a single command-line string.  
Use `exit` as the last command to automatically close the tab when the  
command terminates, assuming the tab's settings are configured to close the  
tab on termination of the shell.  
Precede `exit` with `read -rsn 1` to wait for a keystroke first.

IMPORTANT: Specifying a command to execute in the new tab has limitations:  

* Specifying a startup command is only supported for POSIX-compatible shells,  
  because "\" is used for behind-the-scenes escaping, and the presence of the  
  `eval` / `exec` builtins is assumed on macOS / Linux.  
  Notably, this precludes passing commands to PowerShell.

* With gnome-terminal (Linux), $SHELL, the user's default shell is invariably  
  used to execute the command and to run in the new tab, even if the target  
  profile (settings) is configured to run a different shell.  
  Also, a workaround is employed to keep the tab open: because the $SHELL must  
  be invoked with -c in order to process the command, it exits on completion,  
  so `exec $SHELL` is  executed afterwards to keep the tab open (unless you  
  pass a single `exec` command or multi-command string that ends with `exit`);  
  this second $SHELL instance cannot guarantee that the original's shell  
  environment is fully preserved.

## OPTIONS

 * `-w`  
    creates the new tab in a new window rather than in the front  
    window.

 * `-s <settings>`  
    specifies the settings set (profile) to apply to the new tab, determining  
    the appearance and behavior of the new tab.  
    o Terminal: settings sets are defined in Preferences > Profiles;  
    name matching is case-*in*sensitive, and specifying nonexistent settings  
    causes an error.  
    o iTerm2: profiles are defined in Preferences > Profiles; name matching  
    is case-*sensitive*, and specifying a nonexistent profile causes an error.
    o gnome-terminal: profiles are defined in Edit > Preferences; name matching    
    is case-*sensitive*, and specifying a nonexistent profile falls back to  
    to the default profile.

 * `-t <title>`   
    specifies a custom title to assign to the new tab.    

 * `-d <dir>`  
    explicitly specifies a working directory for the new tab; by default, the  
    invoking shell's working directory is inherited; in Terminal/iTerm, you  
    can use `-d ''` to disable this inheriting.

 * `-q`  
    (*q*uiet) issues a `clear` command after opening the new tab.  
    Note that output will temporarily be visible while the tab is being opened;  
    also, clearing is not performed if any command passed reports an overall  
    nonzero exit code, so as to allow failures to be examined.

 * `-g`  
    Terminal/iTerm2 only:  
    (back*g*round) causes Terminal/iTerm2 not to activate, if it isn't the  
    frontmost application); within the application, however, the new tab will  
    become the active tab; useful in scripts that launch other applications and  
    don't want Terminal/iTerm2 to steal focus later.

 * `-G`  
    Terminal/iTerm2:
      causes Terminal/iTerm2 not to activate *and* the active element within  
      the application not to change; i.e., the active window and tab stay the  
      same. If Terminal/iTerm2 happens to be frontmost, the new tab will  
      effectively open in the background.
    gnome-terminal:  
      causes the new tab not to activate except if it is created in a  
      new window (-w).

NOTE: With `-g` or `-G` specified, for technical reasons, Terminal/iTerm2 /  
      the new tab will still activate *briefly, temporarily* in most scenarios.

* `-a Terminal` or `-a iTerm2`  
    explicitly specifies which terminal application to use on macOS;  
    by default, the terminal application from which this utility is run is  
    implied, if supported, with Terminal / gnome-terminal used as the default  
    on  macOS / Linux.  
    This option is useful for calling this utility from non-terminal  
    applications such as Alfred (https://www.alfredapp.com/) on macOS.

## STANDARD OPTIONS

All standard options provide information only.

 * `-h, --help`  
    Prints the contents of the synopsis chapter to stdout for quick reference.

 * `--man`  
    Displays this manual page, which is a helpful alternative to using `man`, 
    if the manual page isn't installed.

 * `--version`  
    Prints version information.
    
 * `--home`  
    Opens this utility's home page in the system's default web browser.

## LICENSE

For license information and more, visit this utility's home page by running  
`ttab --home`.

## EXAMPLES

    # Open new tab in current terminal window:
    ttab

    # Open new tab in new terminal window:
    ttab -w

    # Open new tab with title 'Green' using settings (profile) 'Grass':
    ttab -t Green -s Grass  

    # Open new tab and execute a command in it:
    ttab ls -l "$HOME/Library/Application Support"

    # Open new tab with specified working dir. and execute a command in it:
    ttab -d "$HOME/Library/Application Support" ls -l
    
    # Execute a command and exit.
    # If configured via the default profile, also close the tab.
    ttab exec /path/to/someprogram arg1 arg2
    
    # Pass a multi-command string as a single, quoted string, wait for a  
    # keystroke, then exit.
    ttab 'ls "$HOME/Library/Application Support";
                                echo Press any key to exit; read -rsn 1; exit'

    # Create a new tab explicitly in iTerm2.
    ttab -a iTerm2 echo "Hi from iTerm2."
